hi everyone I'm Dr eatonson welcome to
heal NPD so I have a confession to make
until very recently I'd never actually
watched one of Dr romani's videos in its
entirety for one I'm not exactly her
Target demographic but for another her
way of conceptualizing NPD doesn't
really fit with mine but I decided to
make a video about empathy and I watched
one of her videos on the topic as
research suffice it to say that she and
I have some pretty significant
disagreements
[Music]
thank you
many people consider low empathy to be a
central diagnostic consideration for
pathological narcissism and NPD
NPD and lack of empathy are so fused in
the popular mind that people often react
with shock and surprise when I inform
them that low or absent empathy is not
actually required for a diagnosis of NPD
for a very large group of people out
there lack of empathy means narcissism
and narcissism means lack of empathy
and this is one reason I was surprised
that Dr romani's video on the topic
claims that individuals with
pathological narcissism and NPD don't
actually lack empathy in fact she makes
the argument that people with NPD are
actually gifted when it comes to empathy
they simply choose not to use it in her
words they can't be bothered to extend
empathy toward those with whom they're
close she says and I quote the most
dangerous part is the narcissist
weaponizing empathy they have an
unbelievable ability to study another
person and get the information they need
and turn around and use it to harm that
person
now in my opinion this perspective
invites viewers to go deeper and deeper
into a two-dimensional worldview in
which the problems in their
interpersonal relationships are caused
by intentional Bad actors wolves in
sheep's clothing Who quote weaponize
empathy but is it correct is Dr ramani
right in saying that narcissists are
choosing to weaponize empathy in my
opinion the field needs to decide
whether pathological narcissism and NPD
actually represent a form of mental
illness
and this is an issue I raised uh way
back in my first video titled the
problem with NPD the diagnostic criteria
for NPD focus on superficial attributes
like arrogance grandiosity and
entitlement but notably absent are any
criteria that focus on suffering or
distress that's often experienced by
individuals with NPD
the one dimensionality of the NPD
construct in the DSM supports stigma and
public antagonism toward this population
essentially NPD as described in the DSM
is the disorder if the criteria
focused instead on deficits and
impairments including empty depression
anxiety vulnerable or variable
self-esteem and even suicidality I think
we'd see a different treatment of this
disorder
but which is it is NPD a mental illness
or is it a form of evil
are narcissists suffering or are they
intentional Bad actors who are out to
get people are they secretly empathy
Geniuses like Dr Romani claims who have
simply chosen to quote weaponize empathy
or are they actually impaired and unable
to empathize especially with those who
are close to them for reasons that have
very little to do with conscious
manipulation
well I think you all know my take on
this question of course there are
individuals out there with NPD who
intentionally hurt and manipulate other
people but I would argue that such
individuals are likely good examples of
malignant narcissism which actually
involves a combination of grandiose
narcissism psychopathy sadism and
paranoia I actually made a video about
this personality style and I'll link to
it in the description
but as a rule it's my experience that
individuals with pathological narcissism
aren't usually quote out to get other
people rather they are often like
someone who's drowning and desperately
fighting for air and such an individual
will blindly pull those around them down
to survive
the DSM itself is somewhat inconsistent
on the topic of empathy it says both
that narcissists lack empathy but then
it also says that narcissists are
unwilling to extend empathy toward those
around them
can it possibly be both
well I like answers yes and I'll explain
why here are the four main reasons for
impaired empathy and pathological
narcissism and NPD
number one lack of self-awareness
narcissists are very sensitive to
feeling shame interpersonal dependency
or humiliation this sensitivity causes
them to disavow repress or split off
vulnerable feelings they're often
shockingly unaware of their own
emotional needs and to an extent this
lack of self-awareness is due to
deficits in their early relationships
with caregivers
many individuals with pathological
narcissism and NPD were exploited
emotionally by caregivers and pressured
into developing a Persona that was
pleasing to those around them this
Persona pretends not to have emotional
needs it pretends not to experience
shame doubt longing grief or
disappointment as children most
narcissists were forced to drive such
feelings underground to bury them in
their own unconscious and to cover them
over by a compensatory grandiose false
self we can't see in others what we
can't see in ourselves we can
intellectually understand what other
people might be going through but to
really empathize with them we need to be
able to find similar experiences inside
of ourselves and since narcissists tend
to be defensively organized in such a
way that they exclude those experiences
from their own conscious awareness
they have a difficult time empathizing
with other people
number two objectification of the self
and of other people
as I've discussed in previous videos
including one titled why narcissists
feel empty inside people with
pathological narcissism and NPD don't
typically experience themselves as a
self
instead they tend to experience
themselves as an object that's either
doing well or that's worthless this
objectification of self is actually a
legacy of relational trauma and the
pressure to perform that many
narcissists experienced in childhood
they were not raised in an environment
where their feelings mattered What
mattered was how well they performed how
well they measured up to the
expectations of a caregiver
they were used treated as an object and
this experience became for them the
centerpiece of selfhood empathy requires
perceiving yourself as a subject as a
being with feelings that are valid and
important and that provide meaningful
context to your life if you can't know
about your own feelings then it becomes
very difficult to understand the
feelings of other people
similarly if you can't perceive your own
intrinsic worth as a subject it's
difficult to perceive others as worthy
subjects in pathological narcissism and
NPD everyone The Narcissist included
tends to be treated as an object that's
either good or bad shiny or ugly
valuable or worthless there's little to
no room in that mix for empathy either
for the self or for other people
objects don't require empathy only
subjects do
three narcissists are like someone who's
drowning or someone who's starving
a sort of desperation underlies most of
their experience only it often doesn't
look like desperation it looks like
pressure
to be the best pressure to have the best
pressure to be noticed pressure to be
seen
consciously many narcissists will
disavow that they need anything at all
because the compensatory grandiose self
is built to defend against shame
rejection and humiliation
and therefore any emotional experience
that might render them vulnerable to one
of those terrible feelings you only have
to scratch the surface of the
narcissist's defensive facade to find a
kind of depthless need a terrifying
desperation that's built on profound
interpersonal dependency narcissists
have a damaged sense of self that
requires constant infusions of external
self-esteem
their ability to generate their own
sense of worth their own sense of
meaning and their own sense of self is
impaired they must borrow those
abilities from those around them
and this gets us back to the metaphor of
a drowning or starving person a drowning
person wants only one thing air and a
starving person wants only one thing
food
all of the considerations are
subordinate to that overarching need the
same is true for pathological narcissism
and MPD we need a viable sense of self
to survive and when someone's sense of
self is in a state of collapse they
can't focus on anything not work not
love not responsibilities
Etc it all goes out the window until a
sense of self is restored just like a
starving person's priorities all go out
the window until they get food in a
starving state of mind we're not capable
of empathy we can't place other people
first
try to rescue a drowning person and see
how quickly they pull you under
there's a reason why lifeguards learn to
extend a poll or throw a life preserver
even the most admirable Among Us will
clutch at someone attempting to rescue
them from drowning in such a way that
both lives are often lost
and number four in my own research I
found that pathological narcissism and
NPD are positively correlated with
something called dismissing avoidant and
fearful avoidant attachment styles
attachment styles are characteristic
ways of engaging in relationships with
other people
we developed them very early in life
based on the ways that were treated by
caregivers those with avoidant
attachment Styles learn to sort of turn
the volume down on their own
interpersonal needs because caregivers
are unresponsive punishing or
inconsistent
a famous study looked at the signs of
stress in toddlers who have avoidant
attachment styles
when separated from their caregiver
these toddlers showed no outward signs
of distress they didn't cry they didn't
fuss they didn't even tend to look up
from what they were doing when the
caregiver left the room
but medical readings of stress like
galvanic skin response remained High
these children had learned to suppress
their attachment needs
they were learning to ignore their own
feelings and longitudinal studies show
that avoidant children often grow into
adults who have something called a
dismissing avoidant attachment style
which is most strongly associated with
the grandiose narcissistic presentation
they tend not to communicate their
interpersonal needs they tend to
downplay the importance of love in
relationships like the toddlers in the
study they still need those things but
they've simply learned to repress their
awareness of those needs driving them
into the unconscious
these individuals consciously avoid
closeness and intimacy and since
expressing empathy is often a way of
increasing or enhancing intimacy
dismissing avoidant individuals will
tend to avoid doing so this avoidance
isn't to manipulate someone rather it's
to protect the person from experiencing
their own attachment longings remember
these individuals learned in childhood
that needing someone only results in
pain or disappointment or unbearable
frustration
and the vulnerable presentation of
narcissism is most strongly associated
with the fearful avoidant attachment
fearful avoidant attachment style is
associated with mixed messages from
caregivers in early childhood it's also
associated with trauma and with abuse
children who often exhibit something
called disorganized attachment behaviors
like approaching caregivers backwards
it's clear that there's an intense
conflict in the child between the need
for love and support and the fear that
it will be delivered in a way that hurts
or harms the child adults with fearful
avoidant attachment Styles will endorse
that they want to be close to other
people but that they're afraid in many
ways this is the most problematic of the
attachment Styles because it contains
both attachment anxiety and attachment
avoidance these individuals are worried
that other people won't like them want
them or accept them
but they're also worried that closeness
will result in pain disappointment
frustration or abuse
people with this attachment style will
often send mixed signals that reflect
their internal conflict around closeness
it might look like being really into
someone at first but then becoming
remote or aloof I think some people call
this love bombing and discarding but
they make the mistake of thinking that
this behavior is intentional and
designed to trick or manipulate people
when it often simply reflects a
disorganized attachment style and an
internal conflict between wanting love
and being terrified to actually receive
it
if you'd like to learn more about the
relationships between these attachment
Styles and pathological narcissism you
can check out my doctoral dissertation
I'll put a citation in the description
I'm sure there are other factors that
impact the availability of empathy in
pathological narcissism in MPD Dr
romani's description is likely accurate
for a small percentage of individual
individuals but I think most people with
this disorder and especially those who
tend to present in a vulnerable way
suffer from a combination of the factors
that I described in this video
okay so that's it for today as always
leave questions comments and suggestions
for future episodes below and please
also consider giving this video a like
or a subscribe if you found it helpful
and until next time take good care
[Music]
foreign